Supernatural appearance by Mary, mother of Jesus


The neutrality of this article is disputed. Relevant discussion may be found on the talk page. Please do not remove this message until conditions to do so are met. (August 2024) (Learn how and when to remove this message)
Part of a series on theMariologyof the Catholic ChurchImmaculate Conception by Bartolomé Esteban Murillo (c. 1675)
Overview
Prayers
Antiphons
Titles
Hymns to Mary
Devotional practices
Saints
Societies
Consecrations and entrustments
Veneration

Titles of Mary
Theotokos (Mother of God)
Mediatrix
Mother of the Church
Our Lady of Good Counsel
Our Lady of Mount Carmel
Our Lady of Sorrows
Our Lady of Victory
Our Lady, Star of the Sea
Queen of Heaven
Queen of Peace
Queen of Poland
Refugium Peccatorum (Refuge of Sinners)
Untier of Knots
Virgin of Mercy

Prayers and hymns
Angelus
Fátima prayers
Flos Carmeli
Hail Mary
Hail Mary of Gold
Immaculata prayer
Magnificat
Mary, Mother of Grace
Memorare
Sub tuum praesidium
 Marian hymns

Devotional practices
Acts of Reparation
Consecration to Mary
First Saturdays
Rosary
Seven Joys of the Virgin
Seven Sorrows of Mary
Three Hail Marys

Movements and societies
Sodality of Our Lady
Congregation of Marian Fathers
Company of Mary (Montfort)
Marianists (Society of Mary)
Marist Fathers
Marist Brothers
Schoenstatt Movement
Legion of Mary
World Apostolate of Fátima (Blue Army)
Mariological Society
Our Lady's Rosary Makers
Marian Movement of Priests
Fatima Family Apostolate
Queen of Angels Foundation

Apparitions
Approved, with widespread liturgicalveneration endorsed by the Holy See:
Fátima
Three Secrets of Fátima
Guadalupe
Knock
La Salette
Lourdes
Miraculous Medal
Walsingham
Dowry of Mary

Key Marian feast days
Mother of God (1 January)
Candlemas (2 February)
Annunciation (25 March)
Assumption (15 August)
Nativity (8 September)
Holy Name (12 September)
Presentation (21 November)
Immaculate Conception (8 December)

 Catholicism portalvte
A Marian apparition is a reported supernatural appearance by Mary the mother of Jesus, or a series of related such appearances during a period of time.
In the Catholic Church, in order for a reported appearance to be classified as a Marian apparition, the person or persons who claim to see Mary (the "seers") must claim that they see her visually located in their environment.[1] If the person claims to hear Mary but not see her, this is known as an interior locution, not an apparition. Also excluded from the category of apparitions are dreams, visions experienced in the imagination, the claimed perception of Mary in ordinarily-explainable natural phenomena, and miracles associated with Marian artwork, such as weeping statues.
Believers consider such apparitions to be real and objective interventions of divine power, rather than subjective experiences generated by the perceiving individuals, even in cases where the apparition is reportedly seen by only some, not all, of the people present at the event's location.
Marian apparitions are considered by believers to be expressions of Mary's ongoing motherly care for the church. The understood purpose of each apparition is to draw attention to some aspect of the Christian message, given the needs of a particular time and place. Apparitions are often accompanied by other alleged supernatural phenomena, such as medical cures. However, such miraculous events are not considered the purpose of Marian apparitions, but are alleged to exist primarily to validate and draw attention to the message.[2]


Examples[edit]
Main article: List of Marian apparitions
The Marian Vision of Saint Bernard, by Fra Bartolommeo, c. 1504. Uffizi, Florence
Some Marian apparitions are associated with one or more titles given to Mary, often based on the location of the apparition, such as Our Lady of Pontmain in Pontmain, France (1871). Others use a title which Mary purportedly applies to herself during the alleged apparition, as in the case of the disputed apparition entitled The Lady of All Nations (Netherlands, 1945..1959).
Some Marian apparitions have only one purported seer, such as that of Our Lady of Lourdes (France, 1858). Other apparitions have multiple seers; in the case of Our Lady of Fatima (1917), there were only three seers of the apparition itself, but miraculous phenomena were reported by a crowd of approximately 70,000 people, and even by others located miles away.[3] In other cases, the entirety of a large group of people claims to see Mary, as in the case of Our Lady of La Vang (Vietnam, c. 1800). Some modern mass apparitions, claimed to have been witnessed by hundreds of thousands, such as Our Lady of Zeitoun (Egypt, 1968~1971).[4]
Most alleged apparitions involve the verbal communication of messages, but others are silent, such as the apparition of Our Lady of Knock (Ireland, 1879).

Our Lady of Guadalupe is widely considered integral to the cultural identity of Mexico and Latin American culture.
Statue of Our Lady of La Salette, an 1846 apparition reported to have occurred in France
Some apparitions are one-time events, such as Our Lady of La Salette (France, 1846). Others recur over an extended period of time, such as Our Lady of Laus (France, 17th/18th centuries), whose seer claimed 54 years of appearances. Public, serial apparitions (in which a seer not only says that they have experienced a vision, but that they expect it will reoccur, causing people to gather to observe) appear to be a relatively recent phenomenon; up until about the seventeenth century, most reported apparitions happened when the individual was alone, or at least no one else was aware of its occurrence.[5]
Physical contact is hardly ever reported as part of Marian apparitions. In rare cases, a physical artifact is reportedly left behind, such as the image of Our Lady of Guadalupe (Mexico, 1531), which is said to have been miraculously imprinted on the cloak of Juan Diego.

Assessment by the Catholic Church[edit]
See also: Normae Congregationis
Jetzer being tricked. Jetzer was a Dominican friar in Bern, and some of his brothers tricked him into thinking he was receiving a revelation from the Virgin Mary. Eventually he realized the truth. As punishment for this scandal, four Dominicans were burned at the stake by order of Pope Julius II with an audience of 30,000 people on May 1, 1509.[6]
The Catholic Church believes that it is possible for actually-supernatural Marian apparitions to occur, but also believes that many claimed apparitions are fabricated by the seer or the result of something other than divine intervention. For this reason, the Catholic Church has a formal evaluation process established for assessing claimed apparitions.
In 1978, the Congregation for the Doctrine of the Faith promulgated the currently-used investigation guidelines in a document entitled "Norms of the Congregation for Proceeding in Judging Alleged Apparitions and Revelations", better known as Normae Congregationis, a shortening of its Latin title.[7]
The 1978 norms were superseded by new guidelines issued by the Dicastery for the Doctrine of the Faith in May 2024. Investigations into alleged apparitions still ordinarily fall first within the jurisdiction of the local ordinary (i.e. diocesan bishop). The document recommends incidents of phenomena should be carefully assessed, to make sure that they are not fraudulent or for monetary gain.[8]
"Six possible conclusions that can be reached when discerning a possible supernatural phenomenon, ranging from a declaration that an event is not of supernatural origin to authorizing and promoting piety and devotion associated with a phenomenon without affirming its divine nature."[9] The bishop is to submit his findings to the Dicastery for review before publishing them.
Occasionally, an ecclesial authority will decide not to investigate the veracity of an apparition in itself, but will permit religious practices related to it. Pope Leo XIII, for example, authorized the use of a scapular described in the messages of Our Lady of Pellevoisin (France, 1876),[10] but did not pass judgment on the supernatural character of the apparition itself.[11]
Under the new norms, a bishop or national conference will not make a declaration that these phenomena are of supernatural origin, but indicate by a "nihil obstat" (meaning "no objection") that they find no problematic elements with a reported phenomenon.[9] Even if a Catholic bishop sees no objection, belief in the apparition is never required of the Catholic faithful.[12][13] The Catholic faith is based on so-called Public Revelation, which ended with the death of the last living Apostle. A Marian apparition, however, is considered private revelation, which may emphasize some facet of the received public revelation for a specific purpose, but can never add anything new to the deposit of faith.[14]

In Marpingen, Germany, Our Lady is said to have appeared several times to three groups of visionaries: in 1876–1877, then in 1934–1936, and in 1999. The investigation performed by the Bishop of Trier after the last apparition concluded in 2005 that "the events in Marpingen cannot be confirmed as being of supernatural origin".[15]
In the Catholic Church, approval of a Marian apparition is relatively rare. The majority of investigated apparitions are rejected as fraudulent or otherwise false.[16] Recently rejected apparition claims include those of "Our Lady of Surbiton", denounced as fraudulent in 2007,[17] and those associated with Holy Love Ministries in Elyria, Ohio, condemned in 2009.[18] Some whose apparition claims are rejected have seceded from the Catholic Church as a result and initiated new groups, as in the case of the Mariavite Church, the Palmarian Catholic Church, and the Fraternité Notre-Dame.

Cultural impact[edit]
See also: Veneration of Mary in the Catholic Church
This section needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources in this section. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.Find sources: "Marian apparition" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR (August 2021) (Learn how and when to remove this message)
Part of a series of articles on
Mother of Jesus
Chronology
Presentation of Mary
Annunciation

Visitation
Marriage
Joseph

Virgin birth
Nativity
Holy Family

Presentation of Jesus at the Temple

Flight into Egypt

Finding in the Temple
Cana

Crucifixion
Resurrection

Pentecost

Marian perspectives
Catholic
Eastern Orthodox

Protestant
Anglican
Lutheran

Ecumenical
Latter Day Saint
Islamic

Catholic Mariology
Mariology
History of Mariology

Papal teachings
Saints

Marian dogmas
Immaculate Conception

Theotokos (Mother of God)

Assumption

Perpetual virginity

Mary in culture
Apparitions
Art
Feast days
Hymns
Music
Shrines
Titles
vte
Marian apparitions, particularly those that are approved officially, often affect Christian piety and the general public. Apparitions can become a part of national identity, as Our Lady of Guadalupe is for the majority-Catholic population of Mexico.
In many cases, apparition seers report a request from Mary for the construction of a shrine on the place of the apparition. Such Marian shrines often become popular sites of Christian pilgrimage. The most-visited Marian shrine in the world is the Basilica of Our Lady of Guadalupe in Mexico City, which draws 10 million pilgrims each year.[19] Other popular apparition-related Marian pilgrimage sites include the Sanctuary of Our Lady of Fátima in Portugal (6–8 million per year[20][21]) and the Sanctuary of Our Lady of Lourdes in France (1.5 million annually).[22]
Apparitions often result in the establishment of Marian confraternities, movements, and societies that seek to heed and spread the messages of a particular apparition, such as the Blue Army of Our Lady of Fátima.
Occasionally, apparitions will introduce prayers that become incorporated into widespread Catholic practice, as for the case of the Fátima prayers, or the legendary revelation of the Rosary to Saint Dominic.


References[edit]


^ Zimdars-Swartz, Sandra L. (2014). Encountering Mary: From La Salette to Medjugorje. Princeton University Press. p. 4. ISBN 978-1400861637. An apparition is best understood as a specific kind of vision in which a person or being not normally within the visionary's perceptual range appears to that person, not in a world apart as in a dream, and not as a modification of a concrete object as in the case of a weeping icon or moving statue, but as part of the environment, without apparent connection to verifiable visual stimuli.

^ Dictionary of Mary, Catholic Book Publishing Co. New York. 1985, Imprimatur, pp. 25–26 ISBN 978-0-89942-367-8

^ Arcement, Katherine (October 13, 2017). "Our Lady of Fatima: The Virgin Mary promised three kids a miracle that 70,000 gathered to see". The Washington Post. Retrieved October 11, 2019.

^ Kosloski, Philip (May 5, 2019). "This Marian apparition in Egypt was witnessed by at least 250,000 people". Aletia. Retrieved October 13, 2019.

^ Zimdars-Swartz, Sandra L. (2014). Encountering Mary: From La Salette to Medjugorje. Princeton University Press. p. 5. ISBN 978-1400861637.

^ History of the Great Reformation of the Sixteenth Century in Germany, Jean Henri Merle d'Aubigné, Philadelphia: Porter & Coates, 1870

^ "Norms Regarding the Manner of Proceeding in the Discernment of Presumed Apparitions or Revelations". Congregation for the Doctrine of the Faith. February 24, 1978.

^ Lowen, Mark (May 18, 2024). "Vatican tightens rules on supernatural phenomena". BBC News. Retrieved May 17, 2024.

^ a b McLellan, Justin (May 17, 2024). "Vatican publishes new norms to discern alleged supernatural phenomena". Catholic News Service. Retrieved May 17, 2024.

^ Cruz, Joan Carroll (2012). See How She Loves Us: 50 Approved Apparitions of Our Lady. Charlotte, North Carolina: TAN Books. pp. 205–211. ISBN 978-0895558039.

^ "All About Mary: Pellevoisin Apparitions". The Marian Library/International Marian Research Institute. Archived from the original on April 13, 2016. Retrieved October 8, 2019.

^ Kosloski, Philip (May 15, 2019). "This map illustrates 500 years of Mary's apparitions". Aleteia. Retrieved October 7, 2019. Even if the Church recognizes an apparition as worthy of belief, no Catholic is obligated to believe in any private revelation, such as an apparition. The Church simply says that a person can find spiritual aid from an apparition, if he or she so chooses.

^ "Private and public revelation". Catholic Culture. Retrieved January 11, 2012.

^ Laurentin, René; Sbalchiero, Patrick (2007). Dictionnaire des «apparitions» de la Vierge Marie (in French). Fayard. p. 12. ISBN 9-782-21363-1011.

^ Louis, Justine (2008). "La Prudence Comme Mot d'Ordre" (PDF). L'Église catholique face à l'extraordinaire chrétien depuis Vatican II: Mémoire de thèse (PhD) (in French). Lyon: Université Jean Moulin Lyon 3. pp. 150–151. S2CID 160094467. Retrieved July 13, 2021.

^ "Apparitions Statistics, Modern : University of Dayton, Ohio". udayton.edu. Retrieved June 19, 2020.

^ Petre, Jonathan (September 23, 2007). "Vatican rejects woman's Virgin Mary claim". The Telegraph. Archived from the original on December 23, 2012. Retrieved October 13, 2019.

^ Armstrong, Patti (November 20, 2009). "Proclamation on Holy Love Ministries Will Test Hearts and Obedience". Catholic Exchange. Retrieved September 8, 2016.

^ "Shrine Of Guadalupe Most Popular In World", Zenit News, June 13, 1999

^ "Religion moves 330 million tourists a year and six million go to Fátima", Diário de Notícias, February 19, 2017.

^ "Fátima expects to receive 8 million visitors in 2017", in Sapo20, December 15, 2016.

^ "Fréquentation de Lourdes". www.lourdes-france.org.


Further reading[edit]
McClure, Kevin (1983). The Evidence for Visions of the Virgin Mary. Wellingborough: Aquarian Press. ISBN 0-85030-351-6.
Laurentin, René (1991) [1990]. The Apparitions of the Blessed Virgin Mary Today. Dublin: Veritas Publications. ISBN 1853901199.
Odell, Catherine M. (1995). Those Who Saw Her: Apparitions of Mary. Huntington: Our Sunday Visitor. ISBN 0-87973-664-X. Archived from the original on August 29, 2022. Retrieved September 2, 2021.
Connell, Janice T. (1996). Meetings with Mary: Visions of The Blessed Mother. United States: Ballantine Books. ISBN 0-345-39705-3.
Sparrow, G. Scott (2004). Sacred Encounters with Mary. Chicago: Thomas More Association/Ave Maria Press. ISBN 1-59471-047-3.
Cruz, Joan Carroll (2012). See How She Loves Us: 50 Approved Apparitions of Our Lady. Charlotte NC: TAN Books. ISBN 978-0895557186.
Maunder, Chris. Our Lady of the Nations: Apparitions of Mary in 20th-century Catholic Europe, Oxford University Press, 2016 ISBN 978-0198718383
Zimdars-Swartz, Sandra L., Encountering Mary: From La Salette to Medjugorje, Princeton University Press, 2014, ISBN 978-1400861637
vteMary, mother of JesusFamily
Joseph (husband)
Jesus (son)
Joachim (father)
Anne (mother)
Elizabeth
Brothers of Jesus
LifeTradition: early life
Immaculate Conception
Birth
Presentation
Marriage to Joseph
Perpetual virginity
In the Bible
Annunciation
Virginal motherhood
Visitation
Nativity of Jesus
Presentation of Jesus
Flight into Egypt
Return to Nazareth
Finding of Jesus in the Temple
Miracle at the Wedding at Cana
Passion of Jesus
Crucifixion
Deposition
Resurrection
Pentecost
Tradition: later life
Bilocation to Saint James
Dormition
Tomb
Assumption
Coronation
Queenship
Woman of the Apocalypse
Apocryphal
Protoevangelium of James
MariologyChristian
Anglican
Catholic
history
papal
Orthodox
Protestant
Lutheran
Other
Islamic
Veneration
Apparitions
list
Catholic churches
Christmas
Devotions
month of May
Feast days
Patronage
Shrines
Veneration of Mary in the Catholic Church
Titles
Christotokos
Coredemptrix
Help of Christians
Immaculate Heart
Life-giving Spring
Mediatrix (of all graces)
New Eve
Panagia
Our Lady of Navigators
Our Lady of Sorrows
Our Lady of Victory
Star of the Sea
Seat of Wisdom
Theotokos
Prayers
Angelus
Antiphons
Alma Redemptoris Mater
Ave Regina caelorum
Salve Regina
Regina caeli
Ave Maria
Fátima prayers
Hymns
Akathist
Ave maris stella
Sub tuum praesidium
Litany
Loreto
Magnificat
Maria mater gratiae
Memorare
Rosary
Three Hail Marys
ArtWest
Assumption
Black Madonna
Golden Madonna of Essen
The Golden Virgin
Pietà
Queen of Heaven
Stabat Mater
East
Agiosoritissa
Madonna del Rosario
Derzhavnaya
Eleusa
Theotokos of Vladimir
Hodegetria
Related
Life of the Virgin
Saint Luke painting the Virgin

 Category
 Saints Portal

vtePrivate revelation in the Catholic ChurchRevelations
Apparitional experience
Christian mysticism
Locution
interior
Marian apparition
Religious ecstasy
Vision (spirituality)
Visions of Jesus and Mary
MiraclesMiraculous events
Eucharistic miracle
Miracle of Lanciano
Lourdes water
Miracle of the Sun
Odour of sanctity
Tabor Light
Thaumaturgy
Weeping statue
Extraordinary graces
Bilocation
Charism
Gift of miracles
Gifts of healing
Glossolalia
Interpretation of tongues
Prophecy
Word of Knowledge
Word of wisdom
Levitation
Stigmata
Discernment
Documents
Code of canon law
Haurietis aquas
Normae Congregationis
Tribus circiter
Magisterium
Rule of Faith
Sensus fidei
Theology
Bridal theology
Christology
Mariology
Mystical theology
Popular piety
Acts of reparation
First Thursdays Devotion
Immaculate Heart of Mary
Consecration
First Saturdays Devotion
Miraculous Medal
Seven Dolors
Pilgrimage
Rosary
Rosary of the Holy Wounds
Sacred Heart
First Fridays Devotion
Divine Mercy
Chaplet of the Divine Mercy
Divine Mercy novena
Eucharistic adoration
Holy Hour
Our Lady of Tears
Saint Michael  in the Catholic Church
Chaplet of Saint Michael
Prayer to Saint Michael
Scapular
ShrinesMarian shrines
Basilica of Our Lady of Guadalupe
Cathedral-Basilica of Our Lady of the Pillar
Chapel of Our Lady of the Miraculous Medal
Knock Shrine
Sanctuary of Our Lady of Fátima
Sanctuary of Our Lady of Lourdes
Shrine of Our Lady of Good Help
Sanctuary of Our Lady of Graces of Onuva
Shrine of Our Lady of the Hens
Shrine of the Virgin of the Rosary of Pompei
Sanctuary of Our Lady of the Rosary of San Nicolás
Others
Basilica of the Sacred Heart of Paray-le-Monial
Sanctuary of the Divine Mercy
Sanctuary of Christ the King
Shrine of the Sacred Heart of Jesus
Sanctuary of Saint Michael the Archangel

 Catholicism portal

vteOur Lady of FátimaMarian apparitions in Fátima, Portugal, in 1917Events
Guardian Angel of Portugal
Three Secrets of Fátima
Miracle of the Sun
Fátima prayers
Consecration of Russia to the Immaculate Heart of Mary
Pontevedra apparitions
First Saturdays Devotion
People
Visionaries
Lúcia dos Santos
Francisco and Jacinta Marto
Artur de Oliveira Santos
Francisco Rodrigues da Cruz
José Alves Correia da Silva
Related places
Aljustrel
Cova da Iria
Valinhos
Sanctuary of Fátima
Chapel of the Apparitions
Basilica of Our Lady of the Rosary
Basilica of the Holy Trinity
Parish Church of Fátima
Sanctuary of the Apparitions
Books bySister Lúcia
Fatima in Lucia's Own Words (1976)
Fatima in Lucia's Own Words II (2000)
Calls from the Message of Fatima (2005)
Media
Avé de Fátima
The Miracle of Our Lady of Fatima (1952 film)
Fatima (2020 film)
A Pathway Under the Gaze of Mary: Biography of Sister Maria Lucia of Jesus and the Immaculate Heart
Related
Fatima Movement of Priests
Blue Army of Our Lady of Fátima
Sol de Fátima
America Needs Fatima
Pope Pius XII 1942 consecration to the Immaculate Heart of Mary
Wax Museum of Fátima
 Catholicism portal
vteOur Lady of LourdesMarian apparitions in Lourdes, France (1858)Apparitions
Lourdes apparitions
Lourdes water
Immaculate Conception
People
Bernadette Soubirous
Dominique Peyramale
Marie Therese Vauzou
Places
Sanctuary of Our Lady of Lourdes
Basilica of Our Lady of the Immaculate Conception
Basilica of St. Pius X
Rosary Basilica
Lourdes grotto replicas
Our Lady of Lourdes (Kāpiti Coast)
Related
Lourdes Medical Bureau
Le pèlerinage de Lourdes
The Song of Bernadette (1941 novel)
The Song of Bernadette (1943 film)
"The Village of St. Bernadette" (1959 song)
Lourdes (2009 film)
Lourdes Hymn
Wax Museum of Lourdes

 Catholicism portal

vteOur Lady of GuadalupeMarian apparitions in Villa de Guadalupe (1531)People
Juan Diego
Juan Bernardino
Don Juan de Zumárraga
Places
Hill of Tepeyac
El Tepeyac National Park
Basilica of Our Lady of Guadalupe
List of churches dedicated to Our Lady of Guadalupe
Historicity
Codex Escalada (1548)
Stradanus engraving (1615 or 1621)
Image of the Virgin Mary Mother of God of Guadalupe (1648 book)
Huei tlamahuiçoltica (1649 tract)
Informaciones Jurídicas de 1666 (1666 testimony)
Maravilla Americana (1756 book)
Related
Miracle of the roses
Tepeyac (1917 film)
The Saint Who Forged a Country (1942 film)
Tonantzin
Marcos Cipac de Aquino
Miguel Sánchez

 Catholicism portal

Authority control databases: National GermanyUnited StatesCzech RepublicLatviaIsrael




Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Marian_apparition&oldid=1241400193"