French Marian visionary
This article's lead section may be too short to adequately summarize the key points. Please consider expanding the lead to provide an accessible overview of all important aspects of the article. (September 2024)


Maximin GiraudBorn26 August 1835Corps en Isère, FranceDied1 March 1875 (aged 39)Corps en Isère, FranceNationalityFrenchKnown forVisionary of Our Lady of La Salette
Part of a series onChristian mysticism
Theology and philosophy
Apophatic
Ascetical
Cataphatic
Catholic spirituality
Hellenistic
Mystical theology
Neoplatonic
Henosis

Practices
Monasticism
Monasticism
New
Silence
Asceticism
Mendicant
Spiritual direction
Meditation
Meditation
Lectio Divina
Invoking of Mystic Saints
Active asceticism
Contemplation
Hesychasm
Jesus Prayer
Quietism
Stages of Christian perfection
Hesychia
Divinization
Catharsis
Theosis
Kenosis
Spiritual dryness
Religious ecstasy
Passive asceticism
Abstinence
Esoteric
Charismatic
Esoteric

People (by era or century)
Antiquity
Ancient African
Origen
Thomasines
Gregory of Nyssa
Pseudo-Dionysius

Desert Fathers
Paul of Thebes
Anthony the Great
Arsenius the Great
Poemen
Macarius of Egypt
Moses the Black
Syncletica
Athanasius
John Chrysostom
Hilarion
John Cassian

11th · 12th
Bernard of Clairvaux
Guigo II
Hildegard of Bingen
Symeon the New Theologian

13th · 14th
Dominican
Dominic de Guzmán

Franciscan
Francis of Assisi
Anthony of Padua
Bonaventure
Jacopone da Todi
Angela of Foligno

English
Richard Rolle
Walter Hilton
Julian of Norwich
Margery Kempe

Flemish
Beatrice of Nazareth
Lutgardis
Hadewijch
John van Ruysbroeck

German
Meister Eckhart
Johannes Tauler
Henry Suso

Female
Beatrice of Nazareth
Bridget of Sweden
Catherine of Siena
Mechthild of Magdeburg
Marguerite Porete


15th · 16th
Spanish
Ignatius of Loyola
Francisco de Osuna
John of Ávila
Teresa of Ávila
John of the Cross

Others
Catherine of Genoa


17th · 18th
French
Margaret Mary Alacoque
Pierre de Bérulle
Jean-Jacques Olier
Louis de Montfort
Charles de Condren
John Eudes
John of St. Samson

Others
Mary of Jesus of Ágreda
Anne Catherine Emmerich
Veronica Giuliani
Francis de Sales


19th
Dina Bélanger
Catherine Labouré
Mélanie Calvat
Maximin Giraud
Bernadette Soubirous
Conchita de Armida
Luisa Piccarreta
Mary of the Divine Heart
Thérèse of Lisieux
Gemma Galgani

20th
Padre Pio
Therese Neumann
Marthe Robin
Alexandrina of Balazar
Faustina Kowalska
Sister Lúcia of Fátima
Edgar Cayce
Simone Weil
Alfred Delp
Thomas Merton
Charles de Foucauld
Edvige Carboni
Elena Aiello

Contemporary papal viewsAspects of meditation(Orationis Formas, 1989)
Reflection on the New Age (2003)


Literature and media
Lingua ignota
Ordo Virtutum
Scivias
Ascent of Mount Carmel
Dark Night of the Soul
Spiritual Canticle
Way of Perfection
Book of the First Monks
The Interior Castle
Abbey of the Holy Ghost
A Dialogue of Comfort against Tribulation
From Willow Creek to Sacred Heart
The Glories of Mary
The Imitation of Christ
The Ladder of Divine Ascent
Philokalia
Revelations of Divine Love
The Story of a Soul
Theologia Germanica
Devotio Moderna
Fatima in Lucia's Own Words
Calls from the Message of Fatima
The Miracle of Our Lady of Fatima
Sol de Fátima
The Cloud of Unknowing
On the Consolation of Philosophy
The Mirror of Simple Souls
Sister Catherine Treatise
Tractatus de Purgatorio Sancti Patricii
The Vision of Adamnán
Divine Comedy
Inferno
Purgatorio
Paradiso
Fatima
vte
Pierre Maximin Giraud (26 August 1835 – 1 March 1875) was a French man known for his Marian visionary of Our Lady of La Salette.


Early life[edit]
Maximin Giraud was born on 26 August 1835, in Corps, Isère. His mother, Anne-Marie Templier hailed from the same region. His father, Germain Giraud was from the neighboring district of Trièves.[1] The mother died leaving Maximin, then 17 months old, and a daughter, Angélique, who was eight years of age. Shortly after, Germain Giraud, a wheelwright by trade, remarried Marie Court. His new wife was reportedly not interested in Maximin and even neglected the child. Maximin grew up in haphazard fashion, spending much of his time with carefree abandon in the sole company of his dog and goat as they roamed the streets of Corps en Isère. Attendance at school was not compulsory and so he never attended classes. The same was true with regard to religious instructions.
Giraud spoke the Vivaro-Alpine[2] (Dauphinois) dialect of the Occitan language,[2] like everybody else in town, but he learned a few words of French as he circulated among the wagon-drivers and travelers at the stage coach relays. He was 11 years old in 1846.

Marian apparition[edit]
Main article: Our Lady of La Salette
On 19 September 1846, about three o'clock in the afternoon, on a mountain about three miles distant from the village of La Salette-Fallavaux, it is related that two children, a shepherdess of fifteen named Mélanie Calvat, called Mathieu, and a shepherd-boy of eleven named Maximin Giraud, both of them uneducated, beheld in a resplendent light a "beautiful lady" clad in a strange costume. Speaking alternately in French and in patois, she passed a message which they were "to deliver to all her people". After complaining of the impiety of Christians, and threatening them with dreadful chastisements in case they should persevere in evil, she promised them the Divine mercy if they would amend.[3] The lady also said something in secret to each of the children. As she spoke to each in turn, the other could see her lips move, but could not hear what she said.[4]
The apparition was approved by Mgr. Philibert de Bruillard, Bishop of Grenoble 16 November 1851 under the title of Our Lady of La Salette.[5] Both secrets were written down by the visionaries and sent to the pope in the same year.

Maximin's secret[edit]
On September 19, 1846, we saw a beautiful Lady. We never said that this lady was the Blessed Virgin but we always said that it was a beautiful Lady. I do not know if it is the Blessed Virgin or another person. As for me, I believe today that it is the Blessed Virgin. Here is what this Lady said to me: 
"If my people continue, what I will say to you will arrive earlier, if it changes a little, it will be a little later. France has corrupted the universe, one day it will be punished. The faith will die out in France: three quarters of France will not practice religion anymore, or almost no more, the other part will practice it without really practicing it. Then, after [that], nations will convert, the faith will be rekindled everywhere.
A great country in the north of Europe, now Protestant, will be converted; by the support of this country all the other nations of the world will be converted. Before all that arrives, great disorders will arrive, in the Church, and everywhere. Then, after [that], our Holy Father the Pope will be persecuted. His successor will be a pontiff that nobody expects.
Then, after [that], a great peace will come, but it will not last a long time. A monster will come to disturb it. All that I tell you here will arrive in the other century, at the latest in the year two thousand."
Maximin Giraud 
(She told me to say it some time before.)
My Most Holy Father, your holy blessing to one of your sheep.

Grenoble, July 3, 1851.
The edition of 3 July 1851 was reproduced on request of Benjamin Dausse, a friend and trustee of Maximin. A second edition followed on 11 August 1851. A third edition was produced on 5 August 1853 at the request of Jacques-Marie-Achille Ginoulhiac, the new bishop of Grenoble, who was unacquainted with the secret.

Interpretation[edit]
Sociologist Michael P. Carroll hypothesizes that the apparition may have grown out of an initial hallucination, shaped by an unconscious desire on the part of Maximin to punish his step-mother for mistreating him. Indications that Maximin may have on occasion gone hungry would be reflected in the predicted punishments relating to famine.[6] Both Melanie's and Maximin's initial impression of the weeping woman was that of a possible victim of domestic violence. In one interview, Maximin said that he thought of a woman "whose son had beaten her and then left her".[7]

Life after the apparition[edit]
During the three years following the apparition, his half-brother Jean-François, his stepmother and his father died.  His mother's brother, called oncle Templier, became Maximin's guardian.[1]
After the apparition, he was placed as a boarder in the Sisters of Providence School in Corps en Isère, where an inquiry concerning the apparition took place. His progress in school was slow, hampered by constant pressure from pilgrims and other curious people. The children never contradicted the story of the apparition, despite being interrogated separately. Giraud went to Ars to meet Saint Jean Baptiste Marie Vianney three times, and was questioned by him about the apparitions. Giraud reportedly did not enjoy the visit but did enjoy the ride and the chance to see new sights. Due to the malice of an assistant priest of Vianney, a misunderstanding arose, which only after eight years was resolved and the Curé once again confirmed his belief in the apparitions.
Afterwards, Maximin moved from place to place.  He entered the Minor Seminary of Rondeau in Grenoble, afterwards moving to the abbey of the Grande Chartreuse.  From there, he travelled to Seyssin, and then to Rome, and thence to Dax,  Aire-sur-l'Adour and Le Vésinet, then to Tonnerre, to Jouy-en-Josas near Versailles, and finally Paris. Maximin tried his vocation as a seminarian, and after that, he worked as a nursing-home employee and a medical student.[8] Failing the state examinations, he went to work in a pharmacy.
In 1865, the Marquise de Pignerolles gave him a trip to Rome, where in April, Maximin enlisted as member of the Corps of Papal Zouaves, who were responsible for the defense of the Papal States and the protection of the Pope. Because of his time at the Paris Medical School, in 1862 he was assigned to the Health Service as a nurse. His time in the Zouaves combined a religious element, with his interest in the military, and his medical training, in an atmosphere of camaraderie. While there, he worked on his memoirs, an account requested by Madame Jourdain. In his subsequent writings, Giraud noted with pride his service with the Zouaves. Giraud saw no major battles and after his enlistment ended, he returned to Paris.[9]
The newspaper La Vie Parisienne published an attack on la Salette and the two children. Giraud protested and the newspaper printed a correction. In reaction towards this, in 1866 he published a short work called Ma profession de foi sur l'apparition de Notre-Dame de La Salette.[10]
It was during this time that the Jourdain family, a couple devoted to him, brought a measure of stability into his life, and, at financial risk to themselves, cleared his debts. In 1869, Giraud then entered into a partnership with a liquor dealer who used his now-famous name to increase sales. Giraud was fraudulently abused by him and failed to profit from the association.[10]
In 1870 he was drafted by the Imperial Army and assigned to Fort Barrau in Grenoble. Following this he returned to Corps and was joined there by the Jourdains. The three were poor but were helped by the fathers of the shrine with the approval of the bishop.[10] In November 1874 Giraud made a pilgrimage to the shrine. In the presence of an audience, he repeated the story of La Salette as he had done on the very first day. This would be the last time he would do so. In February 1875 he visited the parish church, also for the last time.

Death[edit]
Grave of Maximin Giraud, Corps
On the evening of 1 March 1875,  Giraud received the sacrament of Penance and Holy Communion, made his last Confession and drank the La Salette holy water to swallow the Eucharist. Shortly thereafter he died, not yet 40.[11]
His remains lie in the cemetery of Corps. He wanted to underscore once again his love for La Salette and solemnly proclaimed:

I believe firmly, even to the shedding of my blood, in the famous apparition of the most Blessed Virgin on the holy mountain of La Salette, on 19 September 1846, the apparition that I have defended in word and suffering. ... It is with this spirit that I give my heart to Our Lady of La Salette.
See also[edit]
Our Lady of La Salette
Mélanie Calvat
References[edit]


^ a b "Maximin Giraud", La Salette, Province of Mary, Mother of the Americas

^ a b Bert and Costa (2010: 18).

^ Clugnet, Léon. "La Salette." The Catholic Encyclopedia. Vol. 9. New York: Robert Appleton Company, 1910. 30 Dec. 2012

^ St. John, Bernard, The Blessed Virgin the Nineteenth Century: Apparitions, Revelations, Graces,p.116, Burns & Oates, London, 1903

^ "La Salette Apparition", Univ. of Dayton

^ Carroll, Michael P., The Cult of the Virgin: Psychological Origins, p.157, Princeton University Press, 1992 ISBN 9780691028675

^ Zimdars-Schwartz, Sandra L., Encountering Mary: From La Salette to Medjugorje, Princeton University Press, 2014 ISBN 9781400861637

^ Dion, Henry. Maximin Giraud, Berger de La Salette, Éditions Résiac: Montsurs, 1988

^ Gruaz, Laurent (2010). "Maximin Giraud, le berger de La Salette : de l'Apparition de la Vierge aux soldats du Pape". Chrétiens et Sociétés. 17 (17): 151. doi:10.4000/chretienssocietes.2827.

^ a b c Borrelli, Antonio. "Maximin Giraud", Santi Beati, April 6, 2006

^ "Witnesses: Melanie and Maximin", Notre Dame de La Salette


Bibliography[edit]
Bert, Michael, James Costa. 2010. "Linguistic borders, language revitalisation and the imagining of new regional entities", Borders and Identities (Newcastle upon Tyne, 8–9 January 2010), 18.
(in French) Rousselot, Pierre Joseph. 1848. La verité sur l'événement de La Salette du 19 September 1846 ou rapport à Mgr l'évêque de Grenoble sur l'apparition de la Sainte Vierge à deux petits bergers sur la montagne de La Salette, canton de Corps (Isère). Grenoble: Baratier.
(in French) Rousselot, Pierre Joseph. 1850. Nouveaux documents. Grenoble: Baratier.
(in French) Rousselot, Pierre Joseph. 1853. Un nouveau Sanctuaire à Marie, ou Conclusion de l'affaire de La Salette. Grenoble: Baratier.
(in French) Giraud, Maximin. 1866. Ma profession de foi sur l'apparition de Notre-Dame de La Salette. (1st edition.) Paris: Charpentier.
(in French) Giraud, Maximin. [1866] 1870. Ma profession de foi sur l'apparition de Notre-Dame de La Salette. (Reprint.) Paris: Charpentier.
(in French) Giraud, Maximin. [1866] 1873. Ma profession de foi sur l'apparition de Notre-Dame de La Salette. (Reprint.) Paris: Charpentier.
(in French) Roullet, Hervé, L'apparition de la Vierge Marie à La Salette. Marie réconciliatrice. Les vies de Mélanie Calvat et Maximin Giraud. Actualité des secrets, Roullet Hervé, Dif. AVM, Paris, 2021. See in particular Chapters II, XII and XIII.


Further reading[edit]
S., Kennedy, John (2011). Light on the mountain : the story of La Salette (3rd ed.). Attleboro, Mass.: La Salette Communications Center Publications. ISBN 9780982848029. OCLC 863854245.{{cite book}}:  CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list (link)
External links[edit]
La Salette at www.christ-roi.net (French).
Borrelli, Antonio and Flocchini, Emilia. "Maximin Giraud", Santi e Beati, September 14, 2016</ref>



Wikisource has original text related to this article:
Our Lady of La Salette




Wikimedia Commons has media related to Maximin Giraud.

Authority control databases InternationalISNIVIAFFASTWorldCatNationalGermanyUnited StatesFranceBnF dataCzech RepublicNetherlandsPolandVaticanIsraelOtherIdRef




Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Maximin_Giraud&oldid=1246563401"