Style of photograph
The cabinet card was a style of photograph that was widely used for photographic portraiture after 1870. It consisted of a thin photograph mounted on a card typically measuring 108 by 165 mm (4+1⁄4 by 6+1⁄2 inches).


History[edit]
A photograph by G.M. Gros & Bro. of a wedding party probably from the late 1870s to 1880s. (Note the dark-colored wedding dress, which was common during the early to mid-19th century.)
The carte de visite was displaced by the larger cabinet card in the 1880s. Both were most often albumen prints, the primary difference being the cabinet card was larger and usually included extensive logos and information on the reverse side of the card to advertise the photographer's services.  However, later into its popularity, other types of papers began to replace the albumen process.  Despite the similarity, the cabinet card format was initially used for landscape views before it was adopted for portraiture.
Some cabinet card images from the 1890s have the appearance of a black-and-white photograph in contrast to the distinctive sepia toning notable in the albumen print process. These photographs have a neutral image tone and were most likely produced on a matte collodion, gelatin or gelatin bromide paper.
Sometimes images from this period can be identified by a greenish cast. Gelatin papers were introduced in the 1870s and started gaining acceptance in the 1880s and 1890s as the gelatin bromide papers became popular. Matte collodion was used in the same period. A true black-and-white image on a cabinet card is likely to have been produced in the 1890s or after 1900. The last cabinet cards were produced in the 1920s, even as late as 1924.
Owing to the larger image size, the cabinet card steadily increased in popularity during the second half of the 1860s and into the 1870s, replacing the carte de visite as the most popular form of portraiture. The cabinet card was large enough to be easily viewed from across the room when typically displayed on a cabinet, which is probably why they became known as such in the vernacular. However, when the renowned American Civil War photographer Mathew Brady first started offering them to his clientele towards the end of 1865, he used the trademark "Imperial Carte-de-Visite."[1] Whatever the name, the popular print format joined the photograph album as a fixture in the late 19th-century Victorian parlor.

The reverse side of the card as seen above
Early in its introduction, the cabinet card ushered in the temporary disuse of the photographic album which had come into existence commercially with the carte de visite.  Photographers began employing artists to retouch photographs by altering the negative before making the print to hide facial defects revealed by the new format. Small stands and photograph frames for the tabletop replaced the heavy photograph album. Photo album manufacturers responded by producing albums with pages primarily for cabinet cards with a few pages in the back reserved for the old family carte de visite prints.
For nearly three decades after the 1860s, the commercial portraiture industry was dominated by the carte de visite and cabinet card formats. In the decade before 1900, the number and variety of card photograph styles expanded in response to declining sales. Manufacturers of standardized card stock and print materials hoped to stimulate sales and retain public interest in card photographs. However, the public increasingly demanded outdoor and candid photographs with enlarged prints which they could frame or smaller unmounted snapshots they could collect in scrapbooks.

Photographers[edit]
Cabinet card by photographer Warner Gothard, c. 1897
Well-known cabinet card photographers include G.M. Gros & Bro. of Wisconsin and Warner Gothard (1865-1940) who photographed the British royal family when they were in Leeds in 1894. Gothard had studios in Leeds as well as Dewsbury, Halifax and Barnsley.[2][3]
Owing in part to the immense popularity of the affordable Kodak Box Brownie camera, first introduced in 1900, the public increasingly began taking their own photographs, and thus the popularity of the cabinet card declined.[4]

Timeline[edit]
Introduced: 1860.  First used for horizontal views, then eventually adapted for portraits.
Peak popularity: 1880s. Although not uncommon in the 1870s, the cabinet card became more widely used in the 1880s but never displaced the carte de visite.
Decline: 1890s.  As snapshot and personal photography became commonplace among the public, the popularity of the cabinet card and cabinet card specific albums waned. Unmounted paper prints and the scrapbook albums started replacing them. A variety of other large card styles of various names and dimensions came about for professional portraits in the 1880s and 1890s. After 1900, card photographs generally had a much larger area surrounding the print quite often with an embossed frame around the image on heavy, gray card stock.
Last Used: The cabinet card still had a place in public consumption and continued to be produced until the early 1900s and quite a bit longer in Europe. The last cabinet cards were produced in the 1930s.[4]
Dating a cabinet card[edit]
Sojourner Truth sold cabinet cards such as this one, sold in 1870, to support her work.
When attempting to determine the date of creation for a cabinet card, clues can be gathered by the details on the card.  The type of card stock or whether it had right-angled or rounded corners can often help to determine the date of the photograph to as close as five years.  However, it has to be noted that these dating methods are not always 100% accurate, since a Victorian photographer may have been using up old card stock, or the cabinet card may have been a re-print made many years after the photo was originally recorded.[5]
Card stock

1866–1880: square, lightweight mount
1880–1890: square, heavy weight card stock
1890s: scalloped edges
Card colours

1866–1880: thin, light weight card stock in white, off white or light cream; white and light colours were used in later years, but generally on heavier card stock
1880–1890: different colours for face and back of mounts
1882–1888: matte-finish front, with a creamy-yellow, glossy back
Borders

1866–1880: red or gold rules, single and double lines
1884–1885: wide gold borders
1885–1892: gold beveled edges
1889–1896: rounded corner rule of single line
1890s on: Embossed borders and/or lettering
Lettering

A cabinet card from 1896
1866–1879 Photographer name and address often printed small and neatly just below the image, and/or studio name printed small on back.
1880s on: Large, ornate text for photographer name and address, especially in cursive style. Studio name often takes up the entire back of the card.
Late 1880s–1890s Gold text on black card stock
1890s on: embossed studio name or other embossed designs
Card sizes[edit]
Carte de visite  (2.5 by 4.5 inches (64 by 114 mm)), the same size as calling cards[6]
Cabinet card:  (4.5 by 6.5 inches (110 by 170 mm))[6]
Boudoir card: (5.25 by 8.5 inches (133 by 216 mm))[6]
References[edit]


^ "Glossary of Some of the Major Photographic Processes". Mathew Brady. 2004. Retrieved 2018-06-16.

^ Fynn, M. (2022). "Warner Gothard Postcards". www.warnergothard.com. Retrieved 3 May 2022. Their natural artistic talents allowed them to experiment more and more until they fine-tuned a design technique that could be utilized to cover any event from Royal Visits to major mining, railway and shipping disasters.

^ "WARNER GOTHARD : BARNSLEY Group photograph of the Duke and Duchess of York and party at Temple Newsam, Leeds, 6 October 1894". The Royal Collection Trust. 2022. Retrieved 3 May 2022.

^ a b "Cabinet Card". City Gallery. Retrieved 2018-06-16.

^ Powell, Kimberly (2017-03-03). "Cabinet Card". ThoughtCo.

^ a b c Lilley, Rachel. "LibGuides: Card Photographs: Cartes de visite, Cabinet, and Boudoir (mid 1850s to 1920s)". Special Collections and Archives Research Center. Corvallis, OR: Oregon State University Libraries. Retrieved 21 May 2022.


Further reading[edit]
W. & D. Downey, The Cabinet Portrait Gallery. London: Cassell & Co., 1890-94 (in 5 series)
H. A. James, The Price Guide to Photographic Cards. London: Bishopsgate Press, 1982
External links[edit]

Victorian era portal
 Media related to Cabinet cards at Wikimedia Commons

Shields, David S. "Buying and Selling Cabinet Cards 1865-1905". Broadway Photographs. College of Arts & Sciences, University of South Carolina.
kabinettfoto.de—German site about the history of cabinet cards
Knoblock, Steve. "Cabinet Card". City Gallery.
vtePhotographyEquipment
Camera
light-field
digital
field
instant
phone
pinhole
press
rangefinder
SLR
still
TLR
toy
view
Darkroom
enlarger
safelight
Drone
Film
base
format
holder
stock
available films
discontinued films
Filter
Flash
beauty dish
cucoloris
gobo
hot shoe
lens hood
monolight
reflector
snoot
softbox
Lens
long-focus
prime
zoom
wide-angle
fisheye
swivel
telephoto
Manufacturers
Monopod
Movie projector
Slide projector
Tripod
head
Zone plate
Terminology
35 mm equivalent focal length
Angle of view
Aperture
Backscatter
Black-and-white
Chromatic aberration
Circle of confusion
Clipping
Color balance
Color temperature
Depth of field
Depth of focus
Exposure
Exposure compensation
Exposure value
Zebra patterning
F-number
Film format
large
medium
Film speed
Focal length
Guide number
Hyperfocal distance
Lens flare
Metering mode
Perspective distortion
Photograph
Photographic printing
Albumen
Photographic processes
Reciprocity
Red-eye effect
Science of photography
Shutter speed
Sync
Zone System
Genres
Abstract
Aerial
Aircraft
Architectural
Astrophotography
Banquet
Candid
Conceptual
Conservation
Cloudscape
Documentary
Eclipse
Ethnographic
Erotic
Fashion
Fine-art
Fire
Forensic
Glamour
High-speed
Landscape
Monochrome
Nature
Neues Sehen
Nude
Photojournalism
Pictorialism
Pornography
Portrait
Post-mortem
Ruins
Selfie
space selfie
Social documentary
Sports
Still life
Stock
Straight photography
Street
Toy camera
Underwater
Vernacular
Wedding
Wildlife
Techniques
Afocal
Bokeh
Brenizer
Burst mode
Contre-jour
Cyanotype
ETTR
Fill flash
Fireworks
Hand-colouring
Harris shutter
High-speed
Holography
Infrared
Intentional camera movement
Kirlian
Kite aerial
Lo-fi photography
Long-exposure
Luminogram
Macro
Mordançage
Multiple exposure
Multi-exposure HDR capture
Night
Panning
Panoramic
Photogram
Print toning
Pigeon photography
Redscale
Rephotography
Rollout
Scanography
Schlieren photography
Sabattier effect
Slow motion
Stereoscopy
Stopping down
Strip
Slit-scan
Sun printing
Tilt–shift
Miniature faking
Time-lapse
Ultraviolet
Vignetting
Xerography
Zoom burst
Composition
Diagonal method
Framing
Headroom
Lead room
Rule of thirds
Simplicity
Golden triangle (composition)
History
Timeline of photography technology
Ambrotype
Analog photography
Autochrome Lumière
Box camera
Calotype
Camera obscura
Daguerreotype
Dufaycolor
Heliography
Painted photography backdrops
Photography and the law
Glass plate
Tintype
Visual arts
Regional
Albania
Bangladesh
Canada
China
Denmark
Greece
India
Japan
Korea
Luxembourg
Norway
Philippines
Serbia
Slovenia
Sudan
Taiwan
Turkey
Ukraine
United States
Uzbekistan
Vietnam
Digital photography
Digital camera
D-SLR
comparison
MILC
camera back
Digiscoping
Comparison of digital and film photography
Film scanner
Image sensor
CMOS APS
CCD
Three-CCD camera
Foveon X3 sensor
Image sharing
Pixel
Color photography
Print film
Chromogenic print
Reversal film
Color management
color space
primary color
CMYK color model
RGB color model
Photographicprocessing
Bleach bypass
C-41 process
Collodion process
Cross processing
Developer
Digital image processing
Dye coupler
E-6 process
Fixer
Gelatin silver process
Gum printing
Instant film
K-14 process
Print permanence
Push processing
Stop bath
Lists
Most expensive photographs
Museums devoted to one photographer
Photographs considered the most important
Photographers
Norwegian
Polish
street
women
Related
Conservation and restoration of photographs
film
photographic plates
Lomography
Polaroid art
Stereoscopy

 Category
 Outline





Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Cabinet_card&oldid=1246560906"