


Welcome to Wikipedia,
the free encyclopedia that anyone can edit.
6,884,742 articles in English




From today's featured article


New Brompton F.C. in 1894

During their 1894–95 season, New Brompton F.C. (known as Gillingham F.C. since 1912) competed in the Southern Football League Division Two. The club had been formed a year earlier but in the inaugural season played only friendly matches and games in the qualifying rounds of the FA Cup and FA Amateur Cup. In 1894, New Brompton turned professional and joined the newly formed Southern League. The team dominated Division Two of the new league, winning all but one of their matches, and gained promotion to Division One by winning an end-of-season "test match" against Swindon Town, who had finished bottom of the higher division. New Brompton also entered the FA Cup, reaching the third qualifying round. The team played 15 competitive matches, winning 13, drawing none, and losing two. Arthur Rule was the team's top goalscorer for the season. The highest attendance recorded at the club's home, the Athletic Ground, was approximately 8,000 for the visit of Chatham in the FA Cup. (Full article...)


Recently featured: 
The Girl Who Lived in the Tree
Frederick Browning
Jeremy Thorpe


Archive
By email
More featured articles
About

Did you know ...



Yuan Shikai dollar

... that the Republic of China produced coins featuring emperor Yuan Shikai (pictured) for decades after his demise?
... that although Armond Seidler invented the pugil stick for military training purposes, it later found use in the television show American Gladiators?
... that two cosmetic companies engaged in a "rose war" with advertising campaigns based around the song "You're More Beautiful Than a Rose" and the film The Rose of Versailles?
... that Fede Vigevani once presented an awards ceremony in which he won an award?
... that the construction of the Jubilee Bridge was featured in the 1982 documentary about the A9 road reconstruction?
... that Olympic judoka Edmilson Pedro is nicknamed Bicho Papão, which means "the bogeyman"?
... that "New York's wealthiest janitor" lived atop the Bergdorf Goodman Building?
... that Henry Charles Swan, a law graduate from Oxford, spent more than 25 years living on a yacht in a stream in New Zealand?
... that in her song "Slim Pickins", Sabrina Carpenter supposedly settles for someone who does not know the difference between "their", "there", and "they are"?

Archive
Start a new article
Nominate an article




In the news


Alberto Fujimori in 1991

At least 37 people are killed and more than 3,200 others injured after electronic devices used by Hezbollah members explode in Lebanon and Syria.
Amid widespread protests, Mexico ratifies constitutional changes that will see the federal judiciary chosen by popular vote.
Former president of Peru Alberto Fujimori (pictured) dies at the age of 86.
Flooding following a dam collapse in Borno State, Nigeria, leaves at least 30 people dead.

Ongoing: 
Israel–Hamas war
timeline
Russian invasion of Ukraine
timeline
Sudanese civil war
timeline
Recent deaths: 
Joe Schmidt
Otis Davis
Tito Jackson
Fernando Puche
Wolfgang Gerhardt
Caterina Valente

Nominate an article

On this day

September 19: International Talk Like a Pirate Day



Statue of Our Lady of La Salette

1692 – Salem witch trials: Giles Corey was crushed to death for refusing to enter a plea to charges of witchcraft, reportedly asking the sheriff for "more weight" during his execution.
1846 – Near La Salette-Fallavaux in southeastern France, shepherd children Mélanie Calvat and Maximin Giraud reported a Marian apparition, now known as Our Lady of La Salette (statue pictured).
1940 – World War II: Polish resistance leader Witold Pilecki allowed himself to be captured by German forces and sent to Auschwitz to gather intelligence.
1970 – The first Glastonbury Festival was held at Michael Eavis's farm in Glastonbury, England.
1995 – Industrial Society and Its Future, the manifesto of American domestic terrorist Ted Kaczynski, was published in The Washington Post almost three months after it was submitted.
Theodore of Tarsus  (d. 690)Paterson Clarence Hughes  (b. 1917)Judith Kanakuze  (b. 1959)Wu Zhonghua  (d. 1992)

More anniversaries: 
September 18
September 19
September 20


Archive
By email
List of days of the year
About




Today's featured picture






W. S. Gilbert (1836–1911) was an English dramatist, librettist and illustrator best known for his fourteen comic operas produced in collaboration with the composer Arthur Sullivan. The most popular Gilbert and Sullivan collaborations include H.M.S. Pinafore, The Pirates of Penzance and The Mikado, one of the most frequently performed works in the history of musical theatre. These Savoy operas continue to be performed regularly today throughout the English-speaking world and beyond. Gilbert's creative output included more than 75 plays and libretti, numerous stories, poems, lyrics and various other comic and serious pieces. His plays and realistic style of stage direction inspired other dramatists, including Oscar Wilde and George Bernard Shaw, and his comic operas inspired the development of American musical theatre, especially influencing Broadway writers. The journalist Frank M. Boyd wrote of Gilbert: "Till one actually came to know the man, one shared the opinion ... that he was a gruff, disagreeable person; but nothing could be less true of the really great humorist. He had ... precious little use for fools ... but he was at heart as kindly and lovable a man as you could wish to meet." This cabinet card of Gilbert was produced by the photographic studio Elliott & Fry around 1882–1883.

Photograph credit: Elliott & Fry; restored by Adam Cuerden

Recently featured: 
Cinnamon quail-thrush
Ganymede
Pomacanthus maculosus


Archive
More featured pictures




Other areas of Wikipedia

Community portal – The central hub for editors, with resources, links, tasks, and announcements.
Village pump – Forum for discussions about Wikipedia itself, including policies and technical issues.
Site news – Sources of news about Wikipedia and the broader Wikimedia movement.
Teahouse – Ask basic questions about using or editing Wikipedia.
Help desk – Ask questions about using or editing Wikipedia.
Reference desk – Ask research questions about encyclopedic topics.
Content portals – A unique way to navigate the encyclopedia.

Wikipedia's sister projects

Wikipedia is written by volunteer editors and hosted by the Wikimedia Foundation, a non-profit organization that also hosts a range of other volunteer projects:





CommonsFree media repository



MediaWikiWiki software development



Meta-WikiWikimedia project coordination



WikibooksFree textbooks and manuals



WikidataFree knowledge base



WikinewsFree-content news



WikiquoteCollection of quotations



WikisourceFree-content library



WikispeciesDirectory of species



WikiversityFree learning tools



WikivoyageFree travel guide



WiktionaryDictionary and thesaurus



Wikipedia languages


This Wikipedia is written in English. Many other Wikipedias are available; some of the largest are listed below.





1,000,000+ articles



العربية
مصرى
Deutsch
Español
فارسی‎
Français
Italiano
Nederlands
日本語
Polski
Português
Русский
Svenska
Українська
Tiếng Việt
中文





250,000+ articles



Bahasa Indonesia
Bahasa Melayu
閩南語 / Bân-lâm-gú
Български
Català
Čeština
Dansk
Esperanto
Euskara
עברית
Հայերեն
한국어
Magyar
Norsk bokmål
Română
Simple English
Srpski
Srpskohrvatski
Suomi
Türkçe
Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча





50,000+ articles



Asturianu
Azərbaycanca
বাংলা
Bosanski
کوردی
Eesti
Ελληνικά
Frysk
Gaeilge
Galego
Hrvatski
ქართული
Kurdî
Latviešu
Lietuvių
മലയാളം
Македонски
မြန်မာဘာသာ
Norsk nynorsk
ਪੰਜਾਬੀ
Shqip
Slovenčina
Slovenščina
ไทย
తెలుగు
اردو









Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Main_Page&oldid=1225315602"