Nonrestrictive creative work
For the use of free content on Wikipedia, see Wikipedia:Free content.


The logo on the screen in the subject's left hand is a Creative Commons license, while the paper in his right hand explains, in Khmer, that the image is open content
Free content, libre content, libre information, or free information is any kind of creative work, such as a work of art, a book, a software program, or any other creative content unrestricted by copyright and other legal limitations on use. These are works or expressions which can be freely studied, applied, copied and modified by anyone for any purpose[1][better source needed] including, in some cases, commercial purposes. Free content encompasses all works in the public domain and also those copyrighted works whose licenses honor and uphold the definition of free cultural work.
In most countries, the Berne Convention grants copyright holders control over their creations by default. Therefore, copyrighted content must be explicitly declared free by the authors, which is usually accomplished by referencing or including licensing statements from within the work. The right to reuse such a work is granted by the authors in a license known as a free license, a free distribution license, or an open license, depending on the rights assigned. These freedoms given to users in the reuse of works (that is, the right to freely use, study, modify or distribute these works, possibly also for commercial purposes) are often associated with obligations (to cite the original author, to maintain the original license of the reused content) or restrictions (excluding commercial use, banning certain media) chosen by the author.[citation needed] There are a number of standardized licenses offering varied options that allow authors to choose the type of reuse of their work that they wish to authorize or forbid. 


Definition
There are a number of different definitions of free content in regular use. Legally, however, free content is very similar to open content. An analogy is a use of the rival terms free software and open-source, which describe ideological differences rather than legal ones.[2][self-published source?] The term Open Source, by contrast, sought to encompass them all in one movement.[3][4] For instance, the Open Knowledge Foundation's Open Definition describes "open" as synonymous with the definition of free in the "Definition of Free Cultural Works" (as also in the Open Source Definition and Free Software Definition).[5] For such free/open content both movements recommend the same three Creative Commons licenses, the CC BY, CC BY-SA, and CC0.[6][7][8][9]

Legal background
Copyright
Main article: Copyright
Copyright symbol
Copyright is a legal concept, which gives the author or creator of a work legal control over the duplication and public performance of their work. In many jurisdictions, this is limited by a time period after which the works then enter the public domain. Copyright laws are a balance between the rights of creators of intellectual and artistic works and the rights of others to build upon those works. During the time period of copyright the author's work may only be copied, modified, or publicly performed with the consent of the author, unless the use is a fair use. Traditional copyright control limits the use of the work of the author to those who either pay royalties to the author for usage of the author's content or limit their use to fair use. Secondly, it limits the use of content whose author cannot be found.[10] Finally, it creates a perceived barrier between authors by limiting derivative works, such as mashups and collaborative content.[11] Although open content has been described as a counterbalance to copyright, open content licenses rely on a copyright holder's power to license their work, as copyleft which also utilizes copyright for such a purpose.[12]

Public domain
Main article: Public domain
Public domain logo
The public domain is a range of creative works whose copyright has expired or was never established, as well as ideas and facts[note 1] which are ineligible for copyright. A public domain work is a work whose author has either relinquished to the public or no longer can claim control over, the distribution and usage of the work. As such, any person may manipulate, distribute, or otherwise use the work, without legal ramifications. A work in the public domain or released under a permissive license may be referred to as "copycenter".[13]

Copyleft
Main article: Copyleft
Copyleft symbol
Copyleft is a play on the word copyright and describes the practice of using copyright law to remove restrictions on distributing copies and modified versions of a work.[14] The aim of copyleft is to use the legal framework of copyright to enable non-author parties to be able to reuse and, in many licensing schemes, modify content that is created by an author. Unlike works in the public domain, the author still maintains copyright over the material, however, the author has granted a non-exclusive license to any person to distribute, and often modify, the work. Copyleft licenses require that any derivative works be distributed under the same terms and that the original copyright notices be maintained. A symbol commonly associated with copyleft is a reversal of the copyright symbol, facing the other way; the opening of the C points left rather than right. Unlike the copyright symbol, the copyleft symbol does not have a codified meaning.[15]

Usage
Projects that provide free content exist in several areas of interest, such as software, academic literature, general literature, music, images, video, and engineering. Technology has reduced the cost of publication and reduced the entry barrier sufficiently to allow for the production of widely disseminated materials by individuals or small groups. Projects to provide free literature and multimedia content have become increasingly prominent owing to the ease of dissemination of materials that are associated with the development of computer technology. Such dissemination may have been too costly prior to these technological developments.

Media
Creative Commons logo
In media, which includes textual, audio, and visual content, free licensing schemes such as some of the licenses made by Creative Commons have allowed for the dissemination of works under a clear set of legal permissions. Not all Creative Commons licenses are entirely free; their permissions may range from very liberal general redistribution and modification of the work to a more restrictive redistribution-only licensing. Since February 2008, Creative Commons licenses which are entirely free carry a badge indicating that they are "approved for free cultural works".[16] Repositories exist which exclusively feature free material and provide content such as photographs, clip art, music,[17] and literature.[18] While extensive reuse of free content from one website in another website is legal, it is usually not sensible because of the duplicate content problem. Wikipedia is amongst the most well-known databases of user-uploaded free content on the web. While the vast majority of content on Wikipedia is free content, some copyrighted material is hosted under fair-use criteria.

Software
Main article: Free and open-source software
OSI logo
Free and open-source software, which is often referred to as open source software and free software, is a maturing technology with companies using them to provide services and technology to both end-users and technical consumers. The ease of dissemination increases modularity, which allows for smaller groups to contribute to projects as well as simplifying collaboration. Some claim that open source development models offer similar peer-recognition and collaborative benefit incentive as in more classical fields such as scientific research, with the social structures that result leading to decreased production costs.[19]

Free Software Foundation logo
Given sufficient interest in a software component, by using peer-to-peer distribution methods, distribution costs may be reduced, easing the burden of infrastructure maintenance on developers. As distribution is simultaneously provided by consumers, these software distribution models are scalable; that is, the method is feasible regardless of the number of consumers. In some cases, free software vendors may use peer-to-peer technology as a method of dissemination.[20] Project hosting and code distribution is not a problem for most free projects as a number of providers offer these services free of charge.

Engineering and technology
Main articles: Open-source hardware and Open-design movement
Logo of the Open Source Hardware Association
Free content principles have been translated into fields such as engineering, where designs and engineering knowledge can be readily shared and duplicated, in order to reduce overheads associated with project development. Open design principles can be applied in engineering and technological applications, with projects in mobile telephony, small-scale manufacture,[21] the automotive industry,[22][23] and even agricultural areas. Technologies such as distributed manufacturing can allow computer-aided manufacturing and computer-aided design techniques to be able to develop small-scale production of components for the development of new, or repair of existing, devices. Rapid fabrication technologies underpin these developments, which allow end-users of technology to be able to construct devices from pre-existing blueprints, using software and manufacturing hardware to convert information into physical objects.

Academia
Main article: Open access
In academic work, the majority of works are not free, although the percentage of works that are open access is growing. Open access refers to online research outputs that are free of all restrictions to access and free of many restrictions on use (e.g. certain copyright and license restrictions).[24] Authors may see open access publishing as a way of expanding the audience that is able to access their work to allow for greater impact, or support it for ideological reasons.[25][26] Open access publishers such as PLOS and BioMed Central provide capacity for review and publishing of free works; such publications are currently more common in science than humanities. Various funding institutions and governing research bodies have mandated that academics must produce their works to be open-access, in order to qualify for funding, such as the US National Institutes of Health, Research Councils UK (effective 2016) and the European Union (effective 2020).[27][28][29]

Open access symbol, originally designed by PLOS
At an institutional level, some universities, such as the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, have adopted open access publishing by default by introducing their own mandates.[30] Some mandates may permit delayed publication and may charge researchers for open access publishing.[31][32] For teaching purposes, some universities, including MIT, provide freely available course content, such as lecture notes, video resources and tutorials. This content is distributed via Internet to the general public. Publication of such resources may be either by a formal institution-wide program,[33] or informally, by individual academics or departments.
Open content publication has been seen as a method of reducing costs associated with information retrieval in research, as universities typically pay to subscribe for access to content that is published through traditional means.[9][34] Subscriptions for non-free content journals may be expensive for universities to purchase, though the articles are written and peer-reviewed by academics themselves at no cost to the publisher. This has led to disputes between publishers and some universities over subscription costs, such as the one that occurred between the University of California and the Nature Publishing Group.[35][36]

Education
Unesco's Open Educational Resources logoMain articles: Open educational resources and Open textbook
Free and open content has been used to develop alternative routes towards higher education. Open content is a free way of obtaining higher education that is "focused on collective knowledge and the sharing and reuse of learning and scholarly content."[37] There are multiple projects and organizations that promote learning through open content, including OpenCourseWare and Khan Academy. Some universities, like MIT, Yale, and Tufts are making their courses freely available on the internet.[38]
There are also a number of organizations promoting the creation of openly licensed textbooks such as the University of Minnesota's Open Textbook Library, Connexions, OpenStax College, the Saylor Academy, Open Textbook Challenge, and Wikibooks.[citation needed]

Legislation
This section does not cite any sources. Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (July 2024) (Learn how and when to remove this message)
Any country has its own law and legal system, sustained by its legislation, which consists of documents. In a democratic country, laws are published as open content, in principle free content; but in general, there are no explicit licenses attributed for the text of each law, so the license must be assumed as an implied license. Only a few countries have explicit licenses in their law-documents, as the UK's Open Government Licence (a CC BY compatible license). In the other countries, the implied license comes from its proper rules (general laws and rules about copyright in government works). The automatic protection provided by the Berne Convention does not apply to the texts of laws: Article 2.4 excludes the official texts from the automatic protection. It is also possible to "inherit" the license from context. The set of country's law-documents is made available through national repositories. Examples of law-document open repositories: LexML Brazil, Legislation.gov.uk, and N-Lex. In general, a law-document is offered in more than one (open) official version, but the main one is that published by a government gazette. So, law-documents can eventually inherit license expressed by the repository or by the gazette that contains it.

History
This section needs to be updated. The reason given is: The Open Content Project was replaced by Creative Commons over 10 years ago. Please help update this article to reflect recent events or newly available information. (July 2024)
Origins and Open Content Project
The concept of applying free software licenses to content was introduced by Michael Stutz, who in 1997 wrote the paper "Applying Copyleft to Non-Software Information" for the GNU Project.[39] The term "open content" was coined by David A. Wiley in 1998 and evangelized via the Open Content Project, describing works licensed under the Open Content License (a non-free share-alike license, see 'Free content' below) and other works licensed under similar terms.[40]
The website of the Open Content Project once defined open content as 'freely available for modification, use and redistribution under a license similar to those used by the open-source / free software community'.[40] However, such a definition would exclude the Open Content License because that license forbids charging for content; a right required by free and open-source software licenses.[citation needed]

5Rs definition
Open Content Project logo, 1998
It has since come to describe a broader class of content without conventional copyright restrictions. The openness of content can be assessed under the '5Rs Framework' based on the extent to which it can be retained, reused, revised, remixed and redistributed by members of the public without violating copyright law.[41] Unlike free content and content under open-source licenses, there is no clear threshold that a work must reach to qualify as 'open content'.
The 5Rs are put forward on the Open Content Project website as a framework for assessing the extent to which content is open:


Retain – the right to make, own, and control copies of the content (e.g., download, duplicate, store, and manage)
Reuse – the right to use the content in a wide range of ways (e.g., in a class, in a study group, on a website, in a video)
Revise – the right to adapt, adjust, modify, or alter the content itself (e.g., translate the content into another language)
Remix – the right to combine the original or revised content with other open content to create something new (e.g., incorporate the content into a mashup)
Redistribute – the right to share copies of the original content, your revisions, or your remixes with others (e.g., give a copy of the content to a friend)[41]
This broader definition distinguishes open content from open-source software, since the latter must be available for commercial use by the public. However, it is similar to several definitions for open educational resources, which include resources under noncommercial and verbatim licenses.[42][43]

Successor projects
In 2003, David Wiley announced that the Open Content Project had been succeeded by Creative Commons and their licenses; Wiley joined as "Director of Educational Licenses".[44][45]
In 2005, the Open Icecat project was launched, in which product information for e-commerce applications was created and published under the Open Content License. It was embraced by the tech sector, which was already quite open source minded.
In 2006, a Creative Commons' successor project, the Definition of Free Cultural Works, was introduced for free content.[46] It was put forth by Erik Möller, Richard Stallman, Lawrence Lessig, Benjamin Mako Hill, Angela Beesley, and others.[47] The Definition of Free Cultural Works is used by the Wikimedia Foundation.[48] In 2009, the Attribution and Attribution-ShareAlike Creative Commons licenses were marked as "Approved for Free Cultural Works".[49]

Open Knowledge Foundation
Open Knowledge Foundation
Another successor project is the Open Knowledge Foundation, founded by Rufus Pollock in Cambridge, in 2004[50] as a global non-profit network to promote and share open content and data.[51]
In 2007 the OKF gave an Open Knowledge Definition for "content such as music, films, books; data be it scientific, historical, geographic or otherwise; government and other administrative information".[52] In October 2014 with version 2.0 Open Works and Open Licenses were defined and "open" is described as synonymous to the definitions of open/free in the Open Source Definition, the Free Software Definition, and the Definition of Free Cultural Works.[53]
A distinct difference is the focus given to the public domain, open access, and readable open formats. OKF recommends six conformant licenses: three of OKN's (Open Data Commons Public Domain Dedication and Licence, Open Data Commons Attribution License, Open Data Commons Open Database License) and the CC BY, CC BY-SA, and CC0 Creative Commons licenses.[54][55][56]

See also

Free and open-source software portal
Digital rights
Open source
Free education
Free software movement
Freedom of information
Information wants to be free
Open publishing
Open-source hardware
Project Gutenberg [Knowledge for free – The Emergence of Open Educational Resources]. 2007, ISBN 92-64-03174-X.
Explanatory notes


^ The copyright status of uncreative aggregates of basic data may differ by region—for the US see Feist Publications v. Rural Telephone Service; for Australia, see Telstra v Desktop Marketing Systems.


References


^ Erik Möller, e.a. (2008). "Definition of Free Cultural Works". 1.1. freedomdefined.org. Archived from the original on 18 August 2016. Retrieved 20 April 2015.

^ Stallman, Richard. "Why Open Source misses the point of Free Software". Free Software Foundation. Archived from the original on 4 August 2011. Retrieved 5 August 2016.

^ Kelty, Christopher M. (2008). "The Cultural Significance of Free Software – Two Bits" (PDF). Durham and London: Duke University Press. p. 99. Archived (PDF) from the original on 27 August 2008. Retrieved 5 August 2016. Prior to 1998, Free Software referred either to the Free Software Foundation (and the watchful, micromanaging eye of Stallman) or to one of thousands of different commercial, avocational, or university-research projects, processes, licenses, and ideologies that had a variety of names: sourceware, freeware, shareware, open software, public domain software, and so on

^ "Goodbye, "free software"; hello, "open source"". Catb.org. Archived from the original on 2 January 2020. Retrieved 25 October 2012.

^ Open Definition 2.1 Archived 27 January 2017 at the Wayback Machine on opendefinition.org "This essential meaning matches that of "open" with respect to software as in the Open Source Definition and is synonymous with "free" or "libre" as in the Free Software Definition and Definition of Free Cultural Works."

^ licenses Archived 1 March 2016 at the Wayback Machine on opendefinition.com

^ Creative Commons 4.0 BY and BY-SA licenses approved conformant with the Open Definition Archived 4 March 2016 at the Wayback Machine by Timothy Vollmer on creativecommons.org (December 27th, 2013)

^ Open Definition 2.0 released Archived 24 June 2016 at the Wayback Machine by Timothy Vollmer on creativecommons.org (October 7th, 2014)

^ a b "Costs and business models in scientific research publishing: A report commissioned by the Wellcome Trust" (PDF). Archived from the original (PDF) on 19 February 2009. Retrieved 23 May 2009.

^ "The Importance of Orphan Works Legislation". Archived from the original on 5 January 2010. Retrieved 13 June 2011.

^ Ben Depoorter; Francesco Parisi (2002). "Fair use and copyright protection: a price theory explanation". International Review of Law and Economics. 21 (4): 453. CiteSeerX 10.1.1.196.423. doi:10.1016/S0144-8188(01)00071-0. ISSN 0144-8188.

^ Liang, Lawrence (2007). "Free/Open Source Software Open Content" (PDF). Asia-Pacific Development Information Programme: e-Primers on Free/Open Source Software. United Nations Development Programme – Asia-Pacific Development Information Programme. Archived (PDF) from the original on 22 March 2012. Retrieved 23 June 2012.

^ Raymond, Eric S. "Copycenter". The Jargon File. Archived from the original on 16 September 2010. Retrieved 9 August 2008.

^ Dusollier, S (2003). "Open source and copyleft. Authorship reconsidered?". Columbia Journal of Law and the Arts. 26 (296).

^ Hall, G. Brent (2008). Open Source Approaches in Spatial Data Handling. Springer. p. 29. Bibcode:2008osas.book.....H. ISBN 978-3-540-74830-4. Archived from the original on 21 March 2022. Retrieved 22 March 2009.

^ Linksvayer, Mike (20 February 2008). "Approved for Free Cultural Works". Creative Commons. Archived from the original on 17 November 2015. Retrieved 22 March 2009.

^ "iRate Radio". SourceForge.net. Archived from the original on 28 February 2009. Retrieved 22 March 2009.

^ "Gutenberg:No Cost or Freedom?". Project Gutenberg. 23 April 2007. Archived from the original on 24 March 2009. Retrieved 22 March 2009.

^ Mustonen, Mikko. "Copyleft – the economics of Linux and other open-source software" (PDF). Discussion Paper No. 493. Department of Economics, University of Helsinki. Archived from the original (PDF) on 24 March 2009. Retrieved 22 March 2009.

^ Pawlak, Michel; Bryce, Ciarán; Laurière, Stéphane (29 May 2008). "The Practice of Free and Open Source Software Processes" (PDF). Rapport de Recherche. inria-00274193, version 2. 6519 (April 2008). ISSN 0249-6399. Archived (PDF) from the original on 27 April 2011. Retrieved 22 March 2009.

^ Hendry, Andrew (4 March 2008). "RepRap: An open-source 3D printer for the masses". Computerworld Australia. The Industry Standard. Archived from the original on 16 May 2008. Retrieved 22 March 2009.

^ Honsig, Markus (25 January 2006). "The most open of all cars". Technology Review (in German). Heinz Heise. Archived from the original on 6 April 2009. Retrieved 22 March 2009.

^ "Australian drive for green commuter cars". The Sydney Morning Herald. Sydney. 14 June 2010. Retrieved 5 June 2015.

^ Suber, Peter. "Open Access Overview" Archived 19 May 2007 at the Wayback Machine. Earlham.edu. Retrieved on 2011-12-03

^ Alma Swan; Sheridan Brown (May 2005). "Open access self-archiving: An author study" (PDF). Key Perspectives Limited. Archived from the original (PDF) on 8 February 2012. Retrieved 26 July 2010.

^ Andrew, Theo (30 October 2003). "Trends in Self-Posting of Research Material Online by Academic Staff". Ariadne (37). ISSN 1361-3200. Archived from the original on 20 November 2010. Retrieved 22 March 2009.

^ "Policy on Enhancing Public Access to Archived Publications Resulting from NIH-Funded Research". Archived from the original on 24 November 2010. Retrieved 12 July 2009.

^ "Open access - RCUK Policy and revised guidance". Archived from the original on 21 March 2018. Retrieved 13 July 2016.

^ "Outcome of Proceedings, 9526/16 RECH 208 TELECOM 100, The transition towards an Open Science System". Archived from the original on 5 July 2016. Retrieved 13 July 2016.

^ "MIT faculty open access to their scholarly articles". MIT. 20 March 2009. Archived from the original on 30 January 2014. Retrieved 22 November 2010.

^ "Policy of the Society for General Microbiology towards author self-archiving on PubMed Central and institutional and other repositories". Archived from the original on 26 May 2011. Retrieved 10 April 2009.

^ "OnlineOpen". Archived from the original on 27 April 2011. Retrieved 10 April 2009.

^ "About OpenCourseWare". Archived from the original on 22 April 2009. Retrieved 10 April 2009.

^ "AMS Journal price survey". Archived from the original on 28 March 2010. Retrieved 23 May 2009.

^ "Response from the University of California to the Public statement from Nature Publishing Group regarding subscription renewals at the California Digital Library" (PDF). 10 June 2010. Archived from the original (PDF) on 26 June 2010. Retrieved 13 September 2015.

^ Hawkes, Nigel (10 November 2003). "Boycott 'greedy' journal publishers, say scientists". The Times. London. Archived from the original on 29 April 2011. Retrieved 13 September 2015.

^ NMC (2012). "One Year or Less: Open Content". 2010 Horizon Report. Archived from the original on 16 March 2012. Retrieved 18 April 2012.

^ Admin (2012). "Open.edu: Top 50 University Open Courseware Collections". DIY Learning. Archived from the original on 8 October 2017. Retrieved 18 April 2012.

^ Stutz, Michael (1997). "Applying Copyleft To Non-Software Information". www.gnu.org. Free Software Foundation. Retrieved 20 March 2024.

^ a b Wiley, David (1998). "Open Content". OpenContent.org. Archived from the original on 28 January 1999. Retrieved 17 April 2012.

^ a b Wiley, David. "Open Content". OpenContent.org. Archived from the original on 23 June 2012. Retrieved 18 November 2011.

^ Atkins, Daniel E.; John Seely Brown; Allen L. Hammond (February 2007). A Review of the Open Educational Resources (OER) Movement: Achievements, Challenges, and New Opportunities (PDF). Menlo Park, CA: The William and Flora Hewlett Foundation. p. 4. Archived from the original (PDF) on 9 March 2012. Retrieved 3 December 2010.

^ Geser, Guntram (January 2007). Open Educational Practices and Resources. OLCOS Roadmap 2012. Salzburg, Austria: Salzburg Research, EduMedia Group. p. 20. Archived from the original on 4 June 2010. Retrieved 6 November 2010.

^ OpenContent is officially closed. And that's just fine. on opencontent.org (30 June 2003, archived)

^ "Creative Commons Welcomes David Wiley as Educational Use License Project Lead". creativecommons.org. 23 June 2003. Archived from the original on 6 August 2003.

^ "Revision history of "Definition" – Definition of Free Cultural Works". Freedomdefined.org. Archived from the original on 2 November 2012. Retrieved 14 November 2012.

^ "History – Definition of Free Cultural Works". Freedomdefined.org. Archived from the original on 30 October 2012. Retrieved 14 November 2012.

^ "Resolution:Licensing policy". Wikimedia Foundation. Archived from the original on 13 November 2012. Retrieved 14 November 2012.

^ "Approved for Free Cultural Works". Creative Commons. 24 July 2009. Archived from the original on 25 June 2012. Retrieved 14 November 2012.

^ "Open Knowledge Foundation launched". Open Knowledge Foundation Weblog. 24 May 2004. Archived from the original on 1 October 2011. Retrieved 25 October 2015.

^ Davies, Tim (12 April 2014). "Data, information, knowledge and power – exploring Open Knowledge's new core purpose". Tim's Blog. Archived from the original on 29 June 2017. Retrieved 25 October 2015.

^ version 1.0 on opendefinition.org (archived 2007)

^ Open Definition 2.1 Archived 27 January 2017 at the Wayback Machine on opendefinition.org

^ licenses Archived 1 March 2016 at the Wayback Machine on opendefintion.com

^ Creative Commons 4.0 BY and BY-SA licenses approved conformant with the Open Definition Archived 4 March 2016 at the Wayback Machine by Timothy Vollmer on creativecommons.org (27 December 2013)

^ Open Definition 2.0 released Archived 4 March 2016 at the Wayback Machine by Timothy Vollmer on creativecommons.rog (7 October 2014)


Further reading
D. Atkins; J. S. Brown; A. L. Hammond (February 2007). A Review of the Open Educational Resources (OER) Movement: Achievements, Challenges, and New Opportunities (PDF). Report to The William and Flora Hewlett Foundation.
Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD): Giving Know (Archived 7 July 2017 at the Wayback Machine)
External links
 Media related to Open content at Wikimedia Commons
vteIntellectual property activismIssues
Artificial scarcity
Censorship by copyright
Copyright infringement
Copyright troll
Digital rights management
Gripe site
Legal aspects of file sharing
Mashup
digital
music
novel
videos
Monopolies of knowledge
Music piracy
Orphan works
Biopiracy
Bioprospecting
Patents
biological
software
software patent debate
trolling
Public domain
Concepts
All rights reversed
Alternative compensation system
Anti-copyright notice
Business models for open-source software
Copyleft
Commercial use of copyleft works
Commons-based peer production
Electronic sell-through
Free content
Free-software license
Libertarian positions
Open content
Open-design movement
Open music model
Open patent
Open source
hardware
software
Prizes instead of patents
contests
Share-alike
Video on demand
Movements
Access to Knowledge movement
Anti-copyright
Cultural environmentalism
Free-culture movement
Free software movement
OrganizationsPro-copyright
Copyright Alliance
Pro-copyleft
Creative Commons
Electronic Frontier Foundation
Free Software Foundation
Open Rights Group
Organization for Transformative Works
The Pirate Bay
Piratbyrån
Pirate Party
Public Knowledge
Sci-Hub
Shadow library
Students for Free Culture
People
Cory Doctorow
Alexandra Elbakyan
Rick Falkvinge
Lawrence Lessig
Richard Stallman
Peter Suber
Peter Sunde
Aaron Swartz
Documentaries
Steal This Film
Good Copy Bad Copy
RiP!: A Remix Manifesto
TPB AFK
The Internet's Own Boy

vteFree culture and open contentConcepts andpracticesKey concepts
Commons-based peer production
Crowdsourcing
Gratis versus libre
Open collaboration
Open source
Openness
Participatory culture
Sharism
Research and science
Citizen science
Open science
Access
Notebook science
Research
Science data
Plan S
Data, information,and knowledge
Free content
Knowledge commons
Open communication
Open knowledge
Content
Data
Communicationand  learningMedia
Collaborative writing
Democratic media
Open publishing
Participatory media
Peer review
Education
Open education
Educational resources
University
Admissions
Open-door academic policy
Journalism
Citizen media
Citizen journalism and Wiki journalism
Open-source journalism
Products
Free and open-source software (FOSS)
Free/libre software
Open-source software
Open-design movement
Robotics
Open gaming
Open-source architecture
Open-source hardware
Economic principles
Gift economy
Open innovation
Open patent
Open standard
Sharing economy
Politics and governance
Open government
Open-source governance
Organizations
Creative Commons
Free Software Foundation
Open Architecture Network
Openmod Initiative
Open Knowledge Foundation
Open Rights Group
Open Source Initiative
Open Web Foundation
Pirate Party
PLOS
SPARC
Activists
Tim Berners-Lee
Alexandra Elbakyan
Lawrence Lessig
Peter Murray-Rust
Douglas Rushkoff
Richard Stallman
Peter Suber
Peter Sunde
Aaron Swartz
John Wilbanks
Projects andmovements
DIYbio
Free-culture movement
Free software movement
Open science movement
Open Source Ecology
Open-source software movement
OpenCores
OpenWetWare
Sci-Hub
Tools
Licenses
Creative Commons
GPL
Definition docs
Free Cultural Works
Free Software
Open
Open Source
Open Data Indices
Open educational resources
Open music model
Open Web movement






Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Free_content&oldid=1242043377"